README.md, before:

# FLUX.2-klein-4B Pure C Implementation

This program generates images from text prompts (and optionally from other images) using the [FLUX.2-klein-4B model](https://bfl.ai/models/flux-2-klein) from [Black Forest Labs](https://bfl.ai/). It can be used as a library as well, and is implemented entirely in C, with zero external dependencies beyond the C standard library. MPS and BLAS acceleration are optional but recommended.

## Quick Start

```bash
# Build (choose your backend)
make mps       # Apple Silicon (fastest)
# or: make blas    # Intel Mac / Linux with OpenBLAS
# or: make generic # Pure C, no dependencies

# Download the model (~16GB) - pick one:
./download_model.sh                      # using curl
# or: pip install huggingface_hub && python download_model.py

# Generate an image
./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "A woman wearing sunglasses" -o output.png
```

That's it. No Python runtime or CUDA toolkit required at inference time.

## Example Output

![Woman with sunglasses](images/woman_with_sunglasses.png)

*Generated with: `./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "A picture of a woman in 1960 America. Sunglasses. ASA 400 film. Black and White." -W 512 -H 512 -o woman.png`*

### Image-to-Image Example

![antirez to drawing](images/antirez_to_drawing.png)

*Generated with: `./flux -i antirez.png -o antirez_to_drawing.png -p "make it a drawing" -d flux-klein-model`*

## Features

- **Zero dependencies**: Pure C implementation, works standalone. BLAS optional for ~30x speedup (Apple Accelerate on macOS, OpenBLAS on Linux)
- **Metal GPU acceleration**: Automatic on Apple Silicon Macs. Performance matches PyTorch's optimized MPS pipeline
- **Runs where Python can't**: Memory-mapped weights (default) enable inference on 8GB RAM systems where the Python ML stack cannot run FLUX.2 at all
- **Text-to-image**: Generate images from text prompts
- **Image-to-image**: Transform existing images guided by prompts
- **Integrated text encoder**: Qwen3-4B encoder built-in, no external embedding computation needed
- **Memory efficient**: Automatic encoder release after encoding (~8GB freed)
- **Memory-mapped weights**: Enabled by default. Reduces peak memory from ~16GB to ~4-5GB. Fastest mode on MPS; BLAS users with plenty of RAM may prefer `--no-mmap` for faster inference
- **Terminal image display**: watch the resulting image without leaving your terminal (Only with Ghostty / Kitty).

### Terminal Image Display

![Kitty protocol example](images/kitty-example.png)

Display generated images directly in your terminal with `--show`, or watch the denoising process step-by-step with `--show-steps`:

```bash
# Display final image in terminal
./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "a cute robot" -o robot.png --show

# Display each denoising step (slower, but interesting to watch)
./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "a cute robot" -o robot.png --show-steps
```

Requires a terminal supporting the [Kitty graphics protocol](https://sw.kovidgoyal.net/kitty/graphics-protocol/), such as [Kitty](https://sw.kovidgoyal.net/kitty/) or [Ghostty](https://ghostty.org/).

## Usage

### Text-to-Image

```bash
./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "A fluffy orange cat sitting on a windowsill" -o cat.png
```

### Image-to-Image

Transform an existing image based on a prompt:

```bash
./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "oil painting style" -i photo.png -o painting.png
```

FLUX.2 uses **in-context conditioning** for image-to-image generation. Unlike traditional approaches that add noise to the input image, FLUX.2 passes the reference image as additional tokens that the model can attend to during generation. This means:

- The model "sees" your input image and uses it as a reference
- The prompt describes what you want the output to look like
- Results tend to preserve the composition while applying the described transformation

**Tips for good results:**
- Use descriptive prompts that describe the desired output, not instructions
- Good: `"oil painting of a woman with sunglasses, impressionist style"`
- Less good: `"make it an oil painting"` (instructional prompts may work less well)

### Command Line Options

**Required:**
```
-d, --dir PATH        Path to model directory
-p, --prompt TEXT     Text prompt for generation
-o, --output PATH     Output image path (.png or .ppm)
```

**Generation options:**
```
-W, --width N         Output width in pixels (default: 256)
-H, --height N        Output height in pixels (default: 256)
-s, --steps N         Sampling steps (default: 4)
-S, --seed N          Random seed for reproducibility
```

**Image-to-image options:**
```
-i, --input PATH      Input image for img2img
```

**Output options:**
```
-q, --quiet           Silent mode, no output
-v, --verbose         Show detailed config and timing info
    --show            Display image in terminal (Kitty protocol)
    --show-steps      Display each denoising step (slow)
```

**Other options:**
```
-m, --mmap            Memory-mapped weights (default, fastest on MPS)
    --no-mmap         Disable mmap, load all weights upfront
-e, --embeddings PATH Load pre-computed text embeddings (advanced)
-h, --help            Show help
```

## Reproducibility

The seed is always printed to stderr, even when random:
```
$ ./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "a landscape" -o out.png
Seed: 1705612345
...
Saving... out.png 256x256 (0.1s)
```

To reproduce the same image, use the printed seed:
```
$ ./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "a landscape" -o out.png -S 1705612345
```

## PNG Metadata

Generated PNG images include metadata with the seed and model information, so you can always recover the seed even if you didn't save the terminal output:

```bash
# Using exiftool
exiftool image.png | grep flux

# Using Python/PIL
python3 -c "from PIL import Image; print(Image.open('image.png').info)"

# Using ImageMagick
identify -verbose image.png | grep -A1 "Properties:"
```

The following metadata fields are stored:
- `flux:seed` - The random seed used for generation
- `flux:model` - The model name (FLUX.2-klein-4B)
- `Software` - Program identifier

## Building

Choose a backend when building:

```bash
make            # Show available backends
make generic    # Pure C, no dependencies (slow)
make blas       # BLAS acceleration (~30x faster)
make mps        # Apple Silicon Metal GPU (fastest, macOS only)
```

**Recommended:**
- macOS Apple Silicon: `make mps`
- macOS Intel: `make blas`
- Linux with OpenBLAS: `make blas`
- Linux without OpenBLAS: `make generic`

For `make blas` on Linux, install OpenBLAS first:
```bash
# Ubuntu/Debian
sudo apt install libopenblas-dev

# Fedora
sudo dnf install openblas-devel
```

Other targets:
```bash
make clean      # Clean build artifacts
make info       # Show available backends for this platform
```

## Testing

Run the test suite to verify your build produces correct output:

```bash
make test        # Run all 3 tests
make test-quick  # Run only the quick 64x64 test
```

The tests compare generated images against reference images in `test_vectors/`. A test passes if the maximum pixel difference is within tolerance (to allow for minor floating-point variations across platforms).

**Test cases:**
| Test | Size | Steps | Purpose |
|------|------|-------|---------|
| Quick | 64×64 | 2 | Fast txt2img sanity check |
| Full | 512×512 | 4 | Validates txt2img at larger resolution |
| img2img | 256×256 | 4 | Validates image-to-image transformation |

You can also run the test script directly for more options:
```bash
python3 run_test.py --help
python3 run_test.py --quick          # Quick test only
python3 run_test.py --flux-binary ./flux --model-dir /path/to/model
```

## Model Download

Download the model weights (~16GB) from HuggingFace using one of these methods:

**Option 1: Shell script (requires curl)**
```bash
./download_model.sh
```

**Option 2: Python script (requires huggingface_hub)**
```bash
pip install huggingface_hub
python download_model.py
```

Both download the same files to `./flux-klein-model`:
- VAE (~300MB)
- Transformer (~4GB)
- Qwen3-4B Text Encoder (~8GB)
- Tokenizer

## How Fast Is It?

Benchmarks on **Apple M3 Max** (128GB RAM), generating a 4-step image.

The MPS implementation matches the PyTorch optimized pipeline performance.

| Size | C (MPS) | PyTorch (MPS) |
|------|---------|---------------|
| 256x256 | 10.5s | 11s |
| 512x512 | 13s | 13s |
| 1024x1024 | 29s | 25s |

**Notes:**
- All times measured as wall clock, including model loading, no warmup. PyTorch times exclude library import overhead (~5-10s) to be fair.
- The C BLAS backend (CPU) is not shown.
- The `make generic` backend (pure C, no BLAS) is approximately 30x slower than BLAS and not included in benchmarks.

## Resolution Limits

**Maximum resolution**: 1792x1792 pixels. The model produces good results up to this size; beyond this resolution image quality degrades significantly (this is a model limitation, not an implementation issue).

**Minimum resolution**: 64x64 pixels.

Dimensions should be multiples of 16 (the VAE downsampling factor).

## Model Architecture

**FLUX.2-klein-4B** is a rectified flow transformer optimized for fast inference:

| Component | Architecture |
|-----------|-------------|
| Transformer | 5 double blocks + 20 single blocks, 3072 hidden dim, 24 attention heads |
| VAE | AutoencoderKL, 128 latent channels, 8x spatial compression |
| Text Encoder | Qwen3-4B, 36 layers, 2560 hidden dim |

**Inference steps**: This is a distilled model that produces good results with exactly 4 sampling steps.

## Memory Requirements

With mmap (default):

| Phase | Memory |
|-------|--------|
| Text encoding | ~2GB (layers loaded on-demand) |
| Diffusion | ~1-2GB (blocks loaded on-demand) |
| Peak | ~4-5GB |

With `--no-mmap` (all weights in RAM):

| Phase | Memory |
|-------|--------|
| Text encoding | ~8GB (encoder weights) |
| Diffusion | ~8GB (transformer ~4GB + VAE ~300MB + activations) |
| Peak | ~16GB (if encoder not released) |

The text encoder is automatically released after encoding, reducing peak memory during diffusion. If you generate multiple images with different prompts, the encoder reloads automatically.

## Memory-Mapped Weights (Default)

Memory-mapped weight loading is enabled by default. Use `--no-mmap` to disable and load all weights upfront.

```bash
./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "A cat" -o cat.png           # mmap (default)
./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "A cat" -o cat.png --no-mmap # load all upfront
```

**How it works:** Instead of loading all model weights into RAM upfront, mmap keeps the safetensors files memory-mapped and loads weights on-demand:

- **Text encoder (Qwen3):** Each of the 36 transformer layers (~400MB each) is loaded, processed, and immediately freed. Only ~2GB stays resident instead of ~8GB.
- **Denoising transformer:** Each of the 5 double-blocks (~300MB) and 20 single-blocks (~150MB) is loaded on-demand and freed after use. Only ~200MB of shared weights stays resident instead of ~4GB.

This reduces peak memory from ~16GB to ~4-5GB, making inference possible on 16GB RAM systems where the Python ML stack cannot run FLUX.2 at all.

**Performance varies by backend:**

- **MPS (Apple Silicon):** mmap is the **fastest** mode. The model stores weights in bf16 format, and MPS uses them directly via zero-copy pointers into the memory-mapped region. No conversion overhead, and the kernel handles paging efficiently.

- **BLAS (CPU):** mmap is **slightly slower** but uses much less RAM. BLAS requires f32 weights, so each block must be converted from bf16→f32 on every step (25 blocks × 4 steps = 100 conversions). With `--no-mmap`, this conversion happens once at startup. **Recommendation:** If you have 32GB+ RAM and use BLAS, try `--no-mmap` for faster inference. If RAM is limited, mmap lets you run at all.

- **Generic (pure C):** Same tradeoffs as BLAS, but slower overall.

## C Library API

The library can be integrated into your own C/C++ projects. Link against `libflux.a` and include `flux.h`.

### Text-to-Image Generation

Here's a complete program that generates an image from a text prompt:

```c
#include "flux.h"
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void) {
    /* Load the model. This loads VAE, transformer, and text encoder. */
    flux_ctx *ctx = flux_load_dir("flux-klein-model");
    if (!ctx) {
        fprintf(stderr, "Failed to load model: %s\n", flux_get_error());
        return 1;
    }

    /* Configure generation parameters. Start with defaults and customize. */
    flux_params params = FLUX_PARAMS_DEFAULT;
    params.width = 512;
    params.height = 512;
    params.seed = 42;  /* Use -1 for random seed */

    /* Generate the image. This handles text encoding, diffusion, and VAE decode. */
    flux_image *img = flux_generate(ctx, "A fluffy orange cat in a sunbeam", &params);
    if (!img) {
        fprintf(stderr, "Generation failed: %s\n", flux_get_error());
        flux_free(ctx);
        return 1;
    }

    /* Save to file. Format is determined by extension (.png or .ppm). */
    flux_image_save(img, "cat.png");
    printf("Saved cat.png (%dx%d)\n", img->width, img->height);

    /* Clean up */
    flux_image_free(img);
    flux_free(ctx);
    return 0;
}
```

Compile with:
```bash
gcc -o myapp myapp.c -L. -lflux -lm -framework Accelerate  # macOS
gcc -o myapp myapp.c -L. -lflux -lm -lopenblas              # Linux
```

### Image-to-Image Transformation

Transform an existing image guided by a text prompt using in-context conditioning:

```c
#include "flux.h"
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void) {
    flux_ctx *ctx = flux_load_dir("flux-klein-model");
    if (!ctx) return 1;

    /* Load the input image */
    flux_image *photo = flux_image_load("photo.png");
    if (!photo) {
        fprintf(stderr, "Failed to load image\n");
        flux_free(ctx);
        return 1;
    }

    /* Set up parameters. Output size defaults to input size. */
    flux_params params = FLUX_PARAMS_DEFAULT;
    params.seed = 123;

    /* Transform the image - describe the desired output */
    flux_image *painting = flux_img2img(ctx, "oil painting of the scene, impressionist style",
                                         photo, &params);
    flux_image_free(photo);  /* Done with input */

    if (!painting) {
        fprintf(stderr, "Transformation failed: %s\n", flux_get_error());
        flux_free(ctx);
        return 1;
    }

    flux_image_save(painting, "painting.png");
    printf("Saved painting.png\n");

    flux_image_free(painting);
    flux_free(ctx);
    return 0;
}

### Generating Multiple Images

When generating multiple images with different seeds but the same prompt, you can avoid reloading the text encoder:

```c
flux_ctx *ctx = flux_load_dir("flux-klein-model");
flux_params params = FLUX_PARAMS_DEFAULT;
params.width = 256;
params.height = 256;

/* Generate 5 variations with different seeds */
for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
    flux_set_seed(1000 + i);

    flux_image *img = flux_generate(ctx, "A mountain landscape at sunset", &params);

    char filename[64];
    snprintf(filename, sizeof(filename), "landscape_%d.png", i);
    flux_image_save(img, filename);
    flux_image_free(img);
}

flux_free(ctx);
```

Note: The text encoder (~8GB) is automatically released after the first generation to save memory. It reloads automatically if you use a different prompt.

### Error Handling

All functions that can fail return NULL on error. Use `flux_get_error()` to get a description:

```c
flux_ctx *ctx = flux_load_dir("nonexistent-model");
if (!ctx) {
    fprintf(stderr, "Error: %s\n", flux_get_error());
    /* Prints something like: "Failed to load VAE - cannot generate images" */
    return 1;
}
```

### API Reference

**Core functions:**
```c
flux_ctx *flux_load_dir(const char *model_dir);   /* Load model, returns NULL on error */
void flux_free(flux_ctx *ctx);                     /* Free all resources */

flux_image *flux_generate(flux_ctx *ctx, const char *prompt, const flux_params *params);
flux_image *flux_img2img(flux_ctx *ctx, const char *prompt, const flux_image *input,
                          const flux_params *params);
```

**Image handling:**
```c
flux_image *flux_image_load(const char *path);     /* Load PNG or PPM */
int flux_image_save(const flux_image *img, const char *path);  /* 0=success, -1=error */
int flux_image_save_with_seed(const flux_image *img, const char *path, int64_t seed);  /* Save with metadata */
flux_image *flux_image_resize(const flux_image *img, int new_w, int new_h);
void flux_image_free(flux_image *img);
```

**Utilities:**
```c
void flux_set_seed(int64_t seed);                  /* Set RNG seed for reproducibility */
const char *flux_get_error(void);                  /* Get last error message */
void flux_release_text_encoder(flux_ctx *ctx);     /* Manually free ~8GB (optional) */
```

### Parameters

```c
typedef struct {
    int width;              /* Output width in pixels (default: 256) */
    int height;             /* Output height in pixels (default: 256) */
    int num_steps;          /* Denoising steps, use 4 for klein (default: 4) */
    int64_t seed;           /* Random seed, -1 for random (default: -1) */
    float strength;         /* img2img only: 0.0-1.0 (default: 0.75) */
} flux_params;

/* Initialize with sensible defaults */
#define FLUX_PARAMS_DEFAULT { 256, 256, 4, -1, 0.75f }
```

## Debugging

### Comparing with Python Reference

When debugging img2img issues, the `--debug-py` flag allows you to run the C implementation with exact inputs saved from a Python reference script. This isolates whether differences are due to input preparation (VAE encoding, text encoding, noise generation) or the transformer itself.

**Setup:**

1. Set up the Python environment:
```bash
python -m venv flux_env
source flux_env/bin/activate
pip install torch diffusers transformers safetensors einops huggingface_hub
```

2. Clone the flux2 reference (for the model class):
```bash
git clone https://github.com/black-forest-labs/flux flux2
```

3. Run the Python debug script to save inputs:
```bash
python debug/debug_img2img_compare.py
```

This saves to `/tmp/`:
- `py_noise.bin` - Initial noise tensor
- `py_ref_latent.bin` - VAE-encoded reference image
- `py_text_emb.bin` - Text embeddings from Qwen3

4. Run C with the same inputs:
```bash
./flux -d flux-klein-model --debug-py -W 256 -H 256 --steps 4 -o /tmp/c_debug.png
```

5. Compare the outputs visually or numerically.

**What this helps diagnose:**
- If C and Python produce identical outputs with identical inputs, any differences in normal operation are due to input preparation (VAE, text encoder, RNG)
- If outputs differ even with identical inputs, the issue is in the transformer or sampling implementation

### Debug Scripts

The `debug/` directory contains Python scripts for comparing C and Python implementations:

- `debug_img2img_compare.py` - Full img2img comparison with step-by-step statistics
- `debug_rope_img2img.py` - Verify RoPE position encoding matches between C and Python

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Document --iterm2 flag in README

README.md, after:

# FLUX.2-klein-4B Pure C Implementation

This program generates images from text prompts (and optionally from other images) using the [FLUX.2-klein-4B model](https://bfl.ai/models/flux-2-klein) from [Black Forest Labs](https://bfl.ai/). It can be used as a library as well, and is implemented entirely in C, with zero external dependencies beyond the C standard library. MPS and BLAS acceleration are optional but recommended.

## Quick Start

```bash
# Build (choose your backend)
make mps       # Apple Silicon (fastest)
# or: make blas    # Intel Mac / Linux with OpenBLAS
# or: make generic # Pure C, no dependencies

# Download the model (~16GB) - pick one:
./download_model.sh                      # using curl
# or: pip install huggingface_hub && python download_model.py

# Generate an image
./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "A woman wearing sunglasses" -o output.png
```

That's it. No Python runtime or CUDA toolkit required at inference time.

## Example Output

![Woman with sunglasses](images/woman_with_sunglasses.png)

*Generated with: `./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "A picture of a woman in 1960 America. Sunglasses. ASA 400 film. Black and White." -W 512 -H 512 -o woman.png`*

### Image-to-Image Example

![antirez to drawing](images/antirez_to_drawing.png)

*Generated with: `./flux -i antirez.png -o antirez_to_drawing.png -p "make it a drawing" -d flux-klein-model`*

## Features

- **Zero dependencies**: Pure C implementation, works standalone. BLAS optional for ~30x speedup (Apple Accelerate on macOS, OpenBLAS on Linux)
- **Metal GPU acceleration**: Automatic on Apple Silicon Macs. Performance matches PyTorch's optimized MPS pipeline
- **Runs where Python can't**: Memory-mapped weights (default) enable inference on 8GB RAM systems where the Python ML stack cannot run FLUX.2 at all
- **Text-to-image**: Generate images from text prompts
- **Image-to-image**: Transform existing images guided by prompts
- **Integrated text encoder**: Qwen3-4B encoder built-in, no external embedding computation needed
- **Memory efficient**: Automatic encoder release after encoding (~8GB freed)
- **Memory-mapped weights**: Enabled by default. Reduces peak memory from ~16GB to ~4-5GB. Fastest mode on MPS; BLAS users with plenty of RAM may prefer `--no-mmap` for faster inference
- **Terminal image display**: watch the resulting image without leaving your terminal (Ghostty, Kitty, or iTerm2).

### Terminal Image Display

![Kitty protocol example](images/kitty-example.png)

Display generated images directly in your terminal with `--show`, or watch the denoising process step-by-step with `--show-steps`:

```bash
# Display final image in terminal (Kitty/Ghostty)
./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "a cute robot" -o robot.png --show

# Display final image in terminal (iTerm2)
./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "a cute robot" -o robot.png --show --iterm2

# Display each denoising step (slower, but interesting to watch)
./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "a cute robot" -o robot.png --show-steps
```

Requires a terminal supporting the [Kitty graphics protocol](https://sw.kovidgoyal.net/kitty/graphics-protocol/) (such as [Kitty](https://sw.kovidgoyal.net/kitty/) or [Ghostty](https://ghostty.org/)), or [iTerm2](https://iterm2.com/) with the `--iterm2` flag.

## Usage

### Text-to-Image

```bash
./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "A fluffy orange cat sitting on a windowsill" -o cat.png
```

### Image-to-Image

Transform an existing image based on a prompt:

```bash
./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "oil painting style" -i photo.png -o painting.png
```

FLUX.2 uses **in-context conditioning** for image-to-image generation. Unlike traditional approaches that add noise to the input image, FLUX.2 passes the reference image as additional tokens that the model can attend to during generation. This means:

- The model "sees" your input image and uses it as a reference
- The prompt describes what you want the output to look like
- Results tend to preserve the composition while applying the described transformation

**Tips for good results:**
- Use descriptive prompts that describe the desired output, not instructions
- Good: `"oil painting of a woman with sunglasses, impressionist style"`
- Less good: `"make it an oil painting"` (instructional prompts may work less well)

### Command Line Options

**Required:**
```
-d, --dir PATH        Path to model directory
-p, --prompt TEXT     Text prompt for generation
-o, --output PATH     Output image path (.png or .ppm)
```

**Generation options:**
```
-W, --width N         Output width in pixels (default: 256)
-H, --height N        Output height in pixels (default: 256)
-s, --steps N         Sampling steps (default: 4)
-S, --seed N          Random seed for reproducibility
```

**Image-to-image options:**
```
-i, --input PATH      Input image for img2img
```

**Output options:**
```
-q, --quiet           Silent mode, no output
-v, --verbose         Show detailed config and timing info
    --show            Display image in terminal (Kitty protocol)
    --show-steps      Display each denoising step (slow)
    --iterm2          Use iTerm2 protocol instead of Kitty
```

**Other options:**
```
-m, --mmap            Memory-mapped weights (default, fastest on MPS)
    --no-mmap         Disable mmap, load all weights upfront
-e, --embeddings PATH Load pre-computed text embeddings (advanced)
-h, --help            Show help
```

## Reproducibility

The seed is always printed to stderr, even when random:
```
$ ./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "a landscape" -o out.png
Seed: 1705612345
...
Saving... out.png 256x256 (0.1s)
```

To reproduce the same image, use the printed seed:
```
$ ./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "a landscape" -o out.png -S 1705612345
```

## PNG Metadata

Generated PNG images include metadata with the seed and model information, so you can always recover the seed even if you didn't save the terminal output:

```bash
# Using exiftool
exiftool image.png | grep flux

# Using Python/PIL
python3 -c "from PIL import Image; print(Image.open('image.png').info)"

# Using ImageMagick
identify -verbose image.png | grep -A1 "Properties:"
```

The following metadata fields are stored:
- `flux:seed` - The random seed used for generation
- `flux:model` - The model name (FLUX.2-klein-4B)
- `Software` - Program identifier

## Building

Choose a backend when building:

```bash
make            # Show available backends
make generic    # Pure C, no dependencies (slow)
make blas       # BLAS acceleration (~30x faster)
make mps        # Apple Silicon Metal GPU (fastest, macOS only)
```

**Recommended:**
- macOS Apple Silicon: `make mps`
- macOS Intel: `make blas`
- Linux with OpenBLAS: `make blas`
- Linux without OpenBLAS: `make generic`

For `make blas` on Linux, install OpenBLAS first:
```bash
# Ubuntu/Debian
sudo apt install libopenblas-dev

# Fedora
sudo dnf install openblas-devel
```

Other targets:
```bash
make clean      # Clean build artifacts
make info       # Show available backends for this platform
```

## Testing

Run the test suite to verify your build produces correct output:

```bash
make test        # Run all 3 tests
make test-quick  # Run only the quick 64x64 test
```

The tests compare generated images against reference images in `test_vectors/`. A test passes if the maximum pixel difference is within tolerance (to allow for minor floating-point variations across platforms).

**Test cases:**
| Test | Size | Steps | Purpose |
|------|------|-------|---------|
| Quick | 64×64 | 2 | Fast txt2img sanity check |
| Full | 512×512 | 4 | Validates txt2img at larger resolution |
| img2img | 256×256 | 4 | Validates image-to-image transformation |

You can also run the test script directly for more options:
```bash
python3 run_test.py --help
python3 run_test.py --quick          # Quick test only
python3 run_test.py --flux-binary ./flux --model-dir /path/to/model
```

## Model Download

Download the model weights (~16GB) from HuggingFace using one of these methods:

**Option 1: Shell script (requires curl)**
```bash
./download_model.sh
```

**Option 2: Python script (requires huggingface_hub)**
```bash
pip install huggingface_hub
python download_model.py
```

Both download the same files to `./flux-klein-model`:
- VAE (~300MB)
- Transformer (~4GB)
- Qwen3-4B Text Encoder (~8GB)
- Tokenizer

## How Fast Is It?

Benchmarks on **Apple M3 Max** (128GB RAM), generating a 4-step image.

The MPS implementation matches the PyTorch optimized pipeline performance.

| Size | C (MPS) | PyTorch (MPS) |
|------|---------|---------------|
| 256x256 | 10.5s | 11s |
| 512x512 | 13s | 13s |
| 1024x1024 | 29s | 25s |

**Notes:**
- All times measured as wall clock, including model loading, no warmup. PyTorch times exclude library import overhead (~5-10s) to be fair.
- The C BLAS backend (CPU) is not shown.
- The `make generic` backend (pure C, no BLAS) is approximately 30x slower than BLAS and not included in benchmarks.

## Resolution Limits

**Maximum resolution**: 1792x1792 pixels. The model produces good results up to this size; beyond this resolution image quality degrades significantly (this is a model limitation, not an implementation issue).

**Minimum resolution**: 64x64 pixels.

Dimensions should be multiples of 16 (the VAE downsampling factor).

## Model Architecture

**FLUX.2-klein-4B** is a rectified flow transformer optimized for fast inference:

| Component | Architecture |
|-----------|-------------|
| Transformer | 5 double blocks + 20 single blocks, 3072 hidden dim, 24 attention heads |
| VAE | AutoencoderKL, 128 latent channels, 8x spatial compression |
| Text Encoder | Qwen3-4B, 36 layers, 2560 hidden dim |

**Inference steps**: This is a distilled model that produces good results with exactly 4 sampling steps.

## Memory Requirements

With mmap (default):

| Phase | Memory |
|-------|--------|
| Text encoding | ~2GB (layers loaded on-demand) |
| Diffusion | ~1-2GB (blocks loaded on-demand) |
| Peak | ~4-5GB |

With `--no-mmap` (all weights in RAM):

| Phase | Memory |
|-------|--------|
| Text encoding | ~8GB (encoder weights) |
| Diffusion | ~8GB (transformer ~4GB + VAE ~300MB + activations) |
| Peak | ~16GB (if encoder not released) |

The text encoder is automatically released after encoding, reducing peak memory during diffusion. If you generate multiple images with different prompts, the encoder reloads automatically.

## Memory-Mapped Weights (Default)

Memory-mapped weight loading is enabled by default. Use `--no-mmap` to disable and load all weights upfront.

```bash
./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "A cat" -o cat.png           # mmap (default)
./flux -d flux-klein-model -p "A cat" -o cat.png --no-mmap # load all upfront
```

**How it works:** Instead of loading all model weights into RAM upfront, mmap keeps the safetensors files memory-mapped and loads weights on-demand:

- **Text encoder (Qwen3):** Each of the 36 transformer layers (~400MB each) is loaded, processed, and immediately freed. Only ~2GB stays resident instead of ~8GB.
- **Denoising transformer:** Each of the 5 double-blocks (~300MB) and 20 single-blocks (~150MB) is loaded on-demand and freed after use. Only ~200MB of shared weights stays resident instead of ~4GB.

This reduces peak memory from ~16GB to ~4-5GB, making inference possible on 16GB RAM systems where the Python ML stack cannot run FLUX.2 at all.

**Performance varies by backend:**

- **MPS (Apple Silicon):** mmap is the **fastest** mode. The model stores weights in bf16 format, and MPS uses them directly via zero-copy pointers into the memory-mapped region. No conversion overhead, and the kernel handles paging efficiently.

- **BLAS (CPU):** mmap is **slightly slower** but uses much less RAM. BLAS requires f32 weights, so each block must be converted from bf16→f32 on every step (25 blocks × 4 steps = 100 conversions). With `--no-mmap`, this conversion happens once at startup. **Recommendation:** If you have 32GB+ RAM and use BLAS, try `--no-mmap` for faster inference. If RAM is limited, mmap lets you run at all.

- **Generic (pure C):** Same tradeoffs as BLAS, but slower overall.

## C Library API

The library can be integrated into your own C/C++ projects. Link against `libflux.a` and include `flux.h`.

### Text-to-Image Generation

Here's a complete program that generates an image from a text prompt:

```c
#include "flux.h"
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void) {
    /* Load the model. This loads VAE, transformer, and text encoder. */
    flux_ctx *ctx = flux_load_dir("flux-klein-model");
    if (!ctx) {
        fprintf(stderr, "Failed to load model: %s\n", flux_get_error());
        return 1;
    }

    /* Configure generation parameters. Start with defaults and customize. */
    flux_params params = FLUX_PARAMS_DEFAULT;
    params.width = 512;
    params.height = 512;
    params.seed = 42;  /* Use -1 for random seed */

    /* Generate the image. This handles text encoding, diffusion, and VAE decode. */
    flux_image *img = flux_generate(ctx, "A fluffy orange cat in a sunbeam", &params);
    if (!img) {
        fprintf(stderr, "Generation failed: %s\n", flux_get_error());
        flux_free(ctx);
        return 1;
    }

    /* Save to file. Format is determined by extension (.png or .ppm). */
    flux_image_save(img, "cat.png");
    printf("Saved cat.png (%dx%d)\n", img->width, img->height);

    /* Clean up */
    flux_image_free(img);
    flux_free(ctx);
    return 0;
}
```

Compile with:
```bash
gcc -o myapp myapp.c -L. -lflux -lm -framework Accelerate  # macOS
gcc -o myapp myapp.c -L. -lflux -lm -lopenblas              # Linux
```

### Image-to-Image Transformation

Transform an existing image guided by a text prompt using in-context conditioning:

```c
#include "flux.h"
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void) {
    flux_ctx *ctx = flux_load_dir("flux-klein-model");
    if (!ctx) return 1;

    /* Load the input image */
    flux_image *photo = flux_image_load("photo.png");
    if (!photo) {
        fprintf(stderr, "Failed to load image\n");
        flux_free(ctx);
        return 1;
    }

    /* Set up parameters. Output size defaults to input size. */
    flux_params params = FLUX_PARAMS_DEFAULT;
    params.seed = 123;

    /* Transform the image - describe the desired output */
    flux_image *painting = flux_img2img(ctx, "oil painting of the scene, impressionist style",
                                         photo, &params);
    flux_image_free(photo);  /* Done with input */

    if (!painting) {
        fprintf(stderr, "Transformation failed: %s\n", flux_get_error());
        flux_free(ctx);
        return 1;
    }

    flux_image_save(painting, "painting.png");
    printf("Saved painting.png\n");

    flux_image_free(painting);
    flux_free(ctx);
    return 0;
}

### Generating Multiple Images

When generating multiple images with different seeds but the same prompt, you can avoid reloading the text encoder:

```c
flux_ctx *ctx = flux_load_dir("flux-klein-model");
flux_params params = FLUX_PARAMS_DEFAULT;
params.width = 256;
params.height = 256;

/* Generate 5 variations with different seeds */
for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
    flux_set_seed(1000 + i);

    flux_image *img = flux_generate(ctx, "A mountain landscape at sunset", &params);

    char filename[64];
    snprintf(filename, sizeof(filename), "landscape_%d.png", i);
    flux_image_save(img, filename);
    flux_image_free(img);
}

flux_free(ctx);
```

Note: The text encoder (~8GB) is automatically released after the first generation to save memory. It reloads automatically if you use a different prompt.

### Error Handling

All functions that can fail return NULL on error. Use `flux_get_error()` to get a description:

```c
flux_ctx *ctx = flux_load_dir("nonexistent-model");
if (!ctx) {
    fprintf(stderr, "Error: %s\n", flux_get_error());
    /* Prints something like: "Failed to load VAE - cannot generate images" */
    return 1;
}
```

### API Reference

**Core functions:**
```c
flux_ctx *flux_load_dir(const char *model_dir);   /* Load model, returns NULL on error */
void flux_free(flux_ctx *ctx);                     /* Free all resources */

flux_image *flux_generate(flux_ctx *ctx, const char *prompt, const flux_params *params);
flux_image *flux_img2img(flux_ctx *ctx, const char *prompt, const flux_image *input,
                          const flux_params *params);
```

**Image handling:**
```c
flux_image *flux_image_load(const char *path);     /* Load PNG or PPM */
int flux_image_save(const flux_image *img, const char *path);  /* 0=success, -1=error */
int flux_image_save_with_seed(const flux_image *img, const char *path, int64_t seed);  /* Save with metadata */
flux_image *flux_image_resize(const flux_image *img, int new_w, int new_h);
void flux_image_free(flux_image *img);
```

**Utilities:**
```c
void flux_set_seed(int64_t seed);                  /* Set RNG seed for reproducibility */
const char *flux_get_error(void);                  /* Get last error message */
void flux_release_text_encoder(flux_ctx *ctx);     /* Manually free ~8GB (optional) */
```

### Parameters

```c
typedef struct {
    int width;              /* Output width in pixels (default: 256) */
    int height;             /* Output height in pixels (default: 256) */
    int num_steps;          /* Denoising steps, use 4 for klein (default: 4) */
    int64_t seed;           /* Random seed, -1 for random (default: -1) */
    float strength;         /* img2img only: 0.0-1.0 (default: 0.75) */
} flux_params;

/* Initialize with sensible defaults */
#define FLUX_PARAMS_DEFAULT { 256, 256, 4, -1, 0.75f }
```

## Debugging

### Comparing with Python Reference

When debugging img2img issues, the `--debug-py` flag allows you to run the C implementation with exact inputs saved from a Python reference script. This isolates whether differences are due to input preparation (VAE encoding, text encoding, noise generation) or the transformer itself.

**Setup:**

1. Set up the Python environment:
```bash
python -m venv flux_env
source flux_env/bin/activate
pip install torch diffusers transformers safetensors einops huggingface_hub
```

2. Clone the flux2 reference (for the model class):
```bash
git clone https://github.com/black-forest-labs/flux flux2
```

3. Run the Python debug script to save inputs:
```bash
python debug/debug_img2img_compare.py
```

This saves to `/tmp/`:
- `py_noise.bin` - Initial noise tensor
- `py_ref_latent.bin` - VAE-encoded reference image
- `py_text_emb.bin` - Text embeddings from Qwen3

4. Run C with the same inputs:
```bash
./flux -d flux-klein-model --debug-py -W 256 -H 256 --steps 4 -o /tmp/c_debug.png
```

5. Compare the outputs visually or numerically.

**What this helps diagnose:**
- If C and Python produce identical outputs with identical inputs, any differences in normal operation are due to input preparation (VAE, text encoder, RNG)
- If outputs differ even with identical inputs, the issue is in the transformer or sampling implementation

### Debug Scripts

The `debug/` directory contains Python scripts for comparing C and Python implementations:

- `debug_img2img_compare.py` - Full img2img comparison with step-by-step statistics
- `debug_rope_img2img.py` - Verify RoPE position encoding matches between C and Python

## License

MIT
